README.md, before:

# SPARQL examples

This is a collection of SPARQL examples useable on different SIB related SPARQL endpoints or datasets. The examples are stored one query per file in project
specific repositories. 

Each SPARQL query is itself in a turtle file. We use the following ontologies for the basic concepts.

* ShACL for the relation to the text of the Select/Ask queries, and declaring prefixes
* RDFS for comments and labels as shown in the user interfaces
* RDF for basic type relations

```sparql
prefix ex: <https://sparql.uniprot.org/.well-known/sparql-examples/>  # <!-- change per dataset
prefix sh: <http://www.w3.org/ns/shacl#> 
prefix rdf: <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>
prefix rdfs:<http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#> 
ex:1  # <!-- UniProt, Rhea and Swiss-Lipids are numbered but this can be anything.
    a sh:SPARQLSelectExecutable, sh:SPARQLExecutable ;
    sh:prefixes _:sparql_examples_prefixes ; # <!-- required for the import of the prefix declerations. Note the blank node
    rdfs:comment """A comment <em>May have HTML in them</em>"""^^rdf:HTML ;
    sh:select """SELECT ?s
WHERE
{
    ?s ?p ?o .
}""" .
```

# QA.

There is a script `check.sh` that validates that all queries in the examples are valid according to [Jena](https://jena.apache.org).
This is a bit slow because of all stopping and starting of jena, making it faster is possible :) but has not been critical yet.

# Conversion

To load the examples into a sparql endpoint they should be concatanated into one example file. Use the script `convertIntoOneTurtle.sh`
provide the project name with a `-p` parameter

```bash
# e.g. make file examples_uniprot.ttl
./convertIntoOneTrutle.sh -p uniprot
```


# Querying for queryies

As the SPARQL examples are in RDF once loaded in a SPARQL endpoint they can be queried for.
```sparql
PREFIX sh: <http://www.w3.org/ns/shacl#>
SELECT *
WHERE {
  ?ex sh:select|sh:ask|sh:construct|sh:describe ?query .
}
```


# Labeling queries

If you want to add a label to a query please use [schema.org keyword](https://schema.org/keywords)

Commit message:

Add that the check and convert script needs Jena utilities available on your path

README.md, after:

# SPARQL examples

This is a collection of SPARQL examples useable on different SIB related SPARQL endpoints or datasets. The examples are stored one query per file in project
specific repositories. 

Each SPARQL query is itself in a turtle file. We use the following ontologies for the basic concepts.

* ShACL for the relation to the text of the Select/Ask queries, and declaring prefixes
* RDFS for comments and labels as shown in the user interfaces
* RDF for basic type relations

```sparql
prefix ex: <https://sparql.uniprot.org/.well-known/sparql-examples/>  # <!-- change per dataset
prefix sh: <http://www.w3.org/ns/shacl#> 
prefix rdf: <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>
prefix rdfs:<http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#> 
ex:1  # <!-- UniProt, Rhea and Swiss-Lipids are numbered but this can be anything.
    a sh:SPARQLSelectExecutable, sh:SPARQLExecutable ;
    sh:prefixes _:sparql_examples_prefixes ; # <!-- required for the import of the prefix declerations. Note the blank node
    rdfs:comment """A comment <em>May have HTML in them</em>"""^^rdf:HTML ;
    sh:select """SELECT ?s
WHERE
{
    ?s ?p ?o .
}""" .
```

# QA.

There is a script `check.sh` that validates that all queries in the examples are valid according to [Jena](https://jena.apache.org).
This expects the Jena tools to be available in your $PATH. e.g. `export PATH="$JENA_HOME/bin:$PATH"
Check.sh is a bit slow because of all stopping and starting of jena, making it faster is possible :) but has not been critical yet.

# Conversion

To load the examples into a sparql endpoint they should be concatanated into one example file. Use the script `convertIntoOneTurtle.sh`
provide the project name with a `-p` parameter

This expects the Jena tools to be available in your $PATH. e.g. `export PATH="$JENA_HOME/bin:$PATH"

```bash
# e.g. make file examples_uniprot.ttl
./convertIntoOneTrutle.sh -p uniprot
```


# Querying for queryies

As the SPARQL examples are in RDF once loaded in a SPARQL endpoint they can be queried for.
```sparql
PREFIX sh: <http://www.w3.org/ns/shacl#>
SELECT *
WHERE {
  ?ex sh:select|sh:ask|sh:construct|sh:describe ?query .
}
```


# Labeling queries

If you want to add a label to a query please use [schema.org keyword](https://schema.org/keywords)
